# declearn v2.8.0

Released: 11/03/2026

## Release Highlights

### Major changes

#### Client Sampling
Add client sampling abstractions, and integrate it in the
`FederatedServer` (as optionnal argument).  

Client sampling enables to have only a subset of clients participate at each
training round.  
It adds a new API to do so, and an implementation of some basic rules, both
simple (e.g. uniform sampling) and complex (select the best clients w.r.t.
criterion / scoring functions, such as training runtime or gradient norm).  
These rules are made expandable by end-users.  
New rules may be added in the future based on user feedback.

A dedicated
[guide on client sampling features](../user-guide/client_sampling.md) was added
to the documentation. That is the advised entry-point for people interested
in getting around these new features.

#### New usage example : Declearn deployment on Grid5000
Add an example on how to run a Declearn experiment on MNIST dataset, deployed
on the cloud environment Grid5000. This example is added in
`examples/mnist_g5k/`.  
The example is made to be easily adaptable in terms of deployment settings
(number and location of Grid5000 machines).  
See this folder `readme.md` for details.

### Minor changes
- In `Optimizer`, add a way to define a routine triggered at each round start
for OptiModules (the mechanism already existed for Schedulers and
Regularizers).

- For stateful OptiModules, add the possibility to reset their internal states
at round start, with an initializer argument `round_reset`. Concerned
OptiModules are :
    - `AdaGradModule`
    - `AdamModule`
    - `EWMAModule`
    - `MomentumModule`
    - `RMSPropModule`
    - `YogiModule`
    - `YogiMomentumModule`

- Include buffers in `TorchModel`'s `get_weights` when the `trainable` argument
is set to `False` (consistent behavior with `TensorflowModel`). In previous
Declearn versions, buffers (parameters not trained by SGD), were ignored and
cannot be retrieved, now they are considered as non-trainable parameters (like
frozen weights).

- Rework of the logging system :
    - Avoid the pattern of using loggers as constructor argument. But instead
    have a logger per class when singleton (ex: server classes), and one logger
    per instance otherwise (ex: one per client), with pre-determined names.
    - Update the logging system for all classes previously concerned by a
    logger.
    - Prefix all loggers by "declearn." to allow hierarchical logging (and
    configuration).
    - Add logging util functions to easily configure server/client loggers, or
    any logger by its name.

- Add the util function `register_from_attr` to better control type 
auto-registration from a class attribute value.

- Use this util in all classes that auto-registered their subclasses in an
`__init_subclass__` method (wrapping the previously-used `register_type` with
more control and precise error message).

- Use the same auto-registration strategy for the `Model` and `Dataset`
subclasses (previously, they were manually decorated with `@type_register`).

- Pretiffy and add minor features to the public Declearn documentation webpage
(via mkdocs configuration changes).

- Typos, lint fixes and minor docstring changes.

### Bug and performance fixes
- Fix bug in `Checkpointer`'s `garbage_collect` with a 0-valued `max_history`.
Now, putting `max_history=0` will induce no checkpoint.

- Prevent memory leaks on lru_cache in `TorchModel`'s
`_build_samplewise_grads_fn`, by moving the caching from the instance method to
a function `_build_samplewise_grads_fn_cached` that is external to the class.
See [this ruff rule](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/cached-instance-method/)
for details on this fixed issue.

- Improve parsimony (performance, size of network messages) of
`FederatedServer`'s `stop_training` (when frozen weights), by only sending
trainable weights in `StopTraining` message instead of all weights.

### Deprecation
#### Removal of already-deprecated features
- In `FederatedClient` : remove possibility to use a string (path to a JSON)
for `train_data` and `valid_data` arguments. Now, they must be `Dataset`
instances.

- In `NetworkClient` : remove deprecated argument `data_info` of the
`register` method.

- Remove deprecated re-export :
	- `main.privacy` module, moved to `declearn.training.dp` as of Declearn
    2.6.
	- `TrainingManager` in `main.utils`, moved to the `training` module as of
    Declearn 2.6.
	- `Constraint`, `ConstraintSet`, `TimeoutConstraint` ; moved to
    `training._constraint` and thus made private.


#### New deprecation
Previous logging system artifacts : deprecate util function `get_logger`, and
the majority of `logger` arguments (exception for `TrainingManager`), will be
removed in Declearn 2.10.